NIP-59 Gift Wrap (#468)
nostr-protocol/nips: 59.md

NIP-59
======

Gift Wrap
-------------------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:kieran`

This NIP defines a simple method to protect event metadata leakage by using randomly generated keys.

A gift wrap event is a `kind 1059` event which wraps another event with a single use key.

This event kind can be used to wrap DM's or other events which are considered private.

> This is similar in concept to Onion Routing.

Reviewer: if the sender of the event would like to decrypt it at a later date, they can use their "tweaked" private key, rather than a random key when producing the event.   the "tweak value" can be located in an optional implementation dependent tag, or it can simply use the "created_at" field.  tweaking secp256k1 private keys is a well-known mechanism, and should be considered if a client wants to be able to read these events later from a message store, for example.

Author: Any change in how key material is handled needs to be added to NIP-07 or else it's not possible for me to use, this is why ephemeral keys work for me because i create the secret material.

Reviewer: agreed.  that would have to happen first!

Reviewer 2: What do you think of adding a nonce key with a random string to the wrapped event JSON (not as a tag, but as an extra field)?

So for the DM example, you could send the gift wrapped DM with 2 1059 events from different random keys and 2 nonces, one to the recipient and another one to yourself (so you can keep chat history). With 2 nonces, the 2 gift wrap `content`s won't match, so no one can tell it is the same message.

This way you don't need to keep track of the wrapping key for decrypting chat history.

The down side is the created_ats will be close to each other and your copy won't have an `e` tag with the recipient so you cant fetch just the messages sent to a specific user. =(

Reviewer 2: @staab nice so the sender should encrypt the receiver pubkey using the shared secret

But from NIP-04, is `secp256k1.getSharedSecret(SENDER_privkey, '02' + RECEIVER_pubkey).slice(1, 33)` the same value as `secp256k1.getSharedSecret(RECEIVER_privkey, '02' + SENDER_pubkey).slice(1, 33)`? So the receiver can use it to also encrypt his own pubkey and query with `{ #p: [encrypted_receiver_pubkey] }`?

Reviewer 3: No idea, encrypted tags would rely on signing with a shared secret. This PR uses ephemeral keys, but it would be easy to convert it to using a shared secret (since one is necessary for decryption anyway). Encrypted tags could then be encrypted symmetrically.

> To construct a wrapped `kind 4` you first start by producing the `kind 4` event as normal, then create a random key and produce the `kind 1059` by encrypting the `kind 4` as a JSON string and storing it in `content` of the `kind 1059` using the same `p` tag to notify the recipient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To wrap an event, sign it as usual then serialize it to JSON. This string should then be encrypted using
NIP-44 with a different private key. Next, add the signed payload to the `content` field of a new
`kind 1059` event, signed with the same key you used to encrypt the content.

A `p` tag for the recipient MUST be added to the `tags` field on the outer event. To protect recipient identity, this may be a regular pubkey, or one representing a group of people sharing a private key for decryption.
```

Rephrased to make it clearer, and less about kind 4.

Reviewer: this means if alice loses her key, all the messages she sent to bob can be read

Author: Do we really need all these suggestions on tags? If somebody comes to read this NIP they will be confused about why there are so many suggested tags without more context, they should come to their own realization that you can do these things, or they can be explicitly called out, its too vague imo.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand your objection, the only specific I'm adding is `k`, which should be defined in the main table on the readme. But then you say it's too vague at the end? @earonesty and I had talked about this a bit [here](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/pull/580/files#r1218625058), I added the suggestion about optionally copying tags because there are other alternatives (like encrypting tag values) that would be pretty bad. Are you looking for more examples here?

Author: There should not be any requirements on tags, maybe you don't even need a p tag

Reviewer 3: None of the above are requirements, just MAY depending on whether the use case for the wrapper requires filtering (I want to build large private groups on this NIP, which would). Maybe `p` isn't strictly required, but without it wouldn't you have to attempt to decrypt all wrapped messages to find the ones you want?

Reviewer: without a "p" tag, it will be impossible to find the messages you want.   but the "p" tag could, technically, be for a derived key of some kind.   for example, alice may have a public key that she uses only when talking to bob.   in that case, she would only subscribe to events of people in her contact list, and couldn't get dm's from strangers.

so yes, a "p" tag is definitely required, but it need-not be the "p" tag of the recipient.    gift-wrap is a very generic construct

Example wrapped event:
```json
{
    "id": "3731dc639ada388aa5ee8c3404351868d4dd0fdcac00183e540669ddc25e8ad4",
    "pubkey": "4d02c0b4e16db38b80fa3b46548417a4ccc975337e29bc22da72132cf69f3b4a",
    "content": "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?iv=cIiZuLb2FMsLzc+yYf+3IQ==",
    "kind": 1059,

>     "created_at": 1682286690,

Reviewer: `created_at` can be made optional to save space, verifier assumes `created_at` is the same, and verifies the sig as if it is present (not as if it is excluded!).

    "tags": [
        [
            "p",
            "63fe6318dc58583cfe16810f86dd09e18bfd76aabc24a0081ce2856f330504ed"
        ]
    ],
    "sig": "48e50d7c2d301a494e0cf250685fe4a1d7d03bdb0efae38a0e9575d2dea04b8c227f8bc35fd0451f7e1d7828a8c5f7b2f81fdab135d7a3ef92c4364aaaa8514f"
}
```

> The `content` is NIP-04 encrypted JSON string with the temporary key, this is the inner event:

Author: Not sure if we should call out NIP-44 because then we force people to implement that NIP first before being able to use this NIP.

Also I myself won't even be able to use it in snort because I rely on NIP-7 extension to support NIP-44 first.

```json
{
    "id": "08eb6f89e916b0bd747c039d33c11be0575c4c6d2c08363ada1243ea771a92d2",
    "pubkey": "63fe6318dc58583cfe16810f86dd09e18bfd76aabc24a0081ce2856f330504ed",
    "content": "73ZaB2WzPlIwwC55YnhsFA==?iv=1R2WlyrAk9VQ1NdhNuWmsw==",
    "kind": 4,

>     "created_at": 1682286690,

Reviewer: created_at can be made optional to save space, verifier assumes created_at is the same, and verifies the sig as if it is present (not as if it is excluded!).

Reviewer 3: I don't think the additional complexity is worth the space saving.

NIP-59
======

Gift Wrap
-------------------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:kieran`

This NIP defines a simple method to protect event metadata leakage by using randomly generated keys.

A gift wrap event is a `kind 1059` event which wraps another event with a single use key.

This event kind can be used to wrap DM's or other events which are considered private.

This is similar in concept to [Onion Routing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onion_routing).

> To wrap an event, sign it as usual then serialize it to JSON. This string should then be encrypted using NIP-44 with a different private key. 

Reviewer 3: Are we actually switching to nip 44? It's not yet merged, and I'm not sure it's a good idea. Although this would be a good place to start, gift wrap doesn't have to match nip 04 DMs

Author: I think it's a good place to start using it, though it does make it harder for people to support gift wrap, vs using the current nip-04 encryption.

I like NIP-44 simply because its versioned, we really need more things to be versioned

The key used to sign the wrapper and encrypt its contents can be created using any appropriate strategy:
- For the strongest security guarantees, it SHOULD be randomly generated.
- The sender MAY use `sender private * event id mod curve.n` instead of a completely random key. If this is done, the sender can "retain access" to the sent message and is capable of decrypting, deleting or otherwise operating on the outer message.

A `p` tag for the recipient MUST be added to the `tags` field on the outer event. To protect recipient
identity, this may be a regular pubkey, or one representing a group of people sharing a private key for
decryption.

The sender MAY copy tags from the inner event to the outer event. This weakens privacy guarantees,
but may be useful to accommodate server-side filtering. A `k` tag MAY be added to the outer event to
denote the `kind` of the inner event.

Example wrapped event:
```json
{
    "id": "0bb58c5e646ff1a310d888347cd392f0490d80d9ce963a43d10f0af0b3a92d58",
    "pubkey": "67813274a3e44cc5f939cc29f1faa4e6b38f1ee4a22469262d6d9d19c377f027",

>     "content": "{\"ciphertext\":\"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\",\"nonce\":\"CvLX+kBOEBM5ZRm/I+4fncvGqbrcb6Dy\",\"v\":1}",

Reviewer 4: Instead of JSON this should be a simpler format, easier to parse. Maybe prefix the base64 it with the version and add the nonce at the end with a simpler separator.

Reviewer 4: Or maybe not.
